I am Anil Kumar Kandelwal.
Welcome to your YouTube [music] channel
where you post questions and we provide
you with solutions. Here is a very
popular problem which is on probability.
We'll take different scenarios and make
[music] this problem very simple.
Two fair six-sided dice are thrown. One
dice is red and the other is blue. Find
the probability that both dice are
three. One dice is three. Both dice are
of the same number. The total of the two
dice is seven. The total of two dice is
at least 10. One dice is five. Given
that the total is nine, red dice is five
and the sum is more than nine.
So like this there are many questions
which are based on two dice and let us
see how do we solve them. Since we're
talking about sum the first step should
be that we write down the numbers which
will occur when you throw two dice.
We're talking about two fair dice. So
the numbers could be 1 2 3 4 5 6 on one
of them and the other could be 1 2 3
4 5 6.
So those are my red and blue dice and
let's put the operation of addition and
see what really happens. So when you add
1 and 1 uh you get what? you get two and
then 1 + 2 is 3 and then likewise we can
just keep on adding. So it's very easy
to fill up this chart table, right? So 2
+ 1 is 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 3 + 1 is 4 4 5 6 7
8 and 1 9 4 + 1 is 5 6 7 8 9 and 10
6 7 8 9 10 and 11
7 8 9 10 11 and 12. So as you can see 6x
6 we got 36 cells all together where the
sum goes from 2 to 12. Now when you say
both dice are three. So both dice are
three literally means that we're talking
about this and this. Correct? So there's
only one position when both are three
and therefore the solution for this is
so probability for this both three right
so we get three three which is six in
all is only one out of the total of 36
one dice is three next problem is one
dice is three now this is where
sometimes students misinterpret
and one dice is three. It means either
it could be the blue dye or the red dye.
So let's consider blue to be three then
we get all these conditions and if we
consider red to be three we get all
these conditions correct.
So in all how many are the cases where
one dice is three not both right? So, so
we got 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12. See,
6 is not included. So, it is 12 out of
36, right? So, let me write here 12 out
of 36,
which is 1 out of three.
It makes sense, right?
Okay. So, one dice is three. Both dice
are of same number. So when they become
of the same number then what are we
talking about? Same number means 1 1 2
right? So so we get this kind of a sum
right
3 [music]
4 5 and 66.
So those are all the cases which are as
you can easily count six out of 36 dice
which is one of the six
correct.
The total of the two dice is seven. So
we can now see where is the total of
seven and total [music] of seven is uh
right there. You can see six in one
like you can circle these and figure out
what is the number. So 1 2 3 4 5 6
[music] and there's also 6 out of 36
which is 1 out of six.
Now the total of the two dice is at
least 10.
When we say at least 10 means this total
could be 10, 11 or 12. This means at
least 10, right?
Clear. So 10, 11 and 12. So for that we
are looking into this corner which is
this corner. Great.
So 10 R3 11 2 and 1 six. Right? So at
least 10 is 6 out of 36.
Why is 1 out of six? Perfect. Now
one dice is given as five. One dice is
five given
that the total given that the total is
nine. So we are given that the total is
nine. When the total is nine, one of
them is five. So that means we are
restricted to
these four cases that the total is nine.
Now in these four cases one dice is
five. We got this when red is five and
that when blue is five. So two out of
four. Do you see that? So two out of
four. 50/50.
50% chances that one of them is five.
and G is red dice is five. We given red
dice is five and the sum is more than
nine.
It's going to be two out of six.
So once again part G red dice is five.
So that is this column right?
So we could get total as 6 7 8 9 10 11
right. So, so the total could be 6 7 8 9
10 and 11. So, once we give you a
condition that becomes the domain,
right? So, red dice is five and the sum
is more than nine. So, out of this you
can see there are only two cases and
therefore the answer will be two out of
six. Make sense? Which should be written
as 1 out of three 1/3.
Correct?
I hope with this how do we work
probability with two dice is absolutely
clear. Feel free to write your comment,
share your views. If you like and
subscribe to my videos that' be great.
Also look forward to my books which are
being released on Amazon. Thank you and
all the best.